Tho I was introduced to the term abruptly as my secondary school finished, I only dived into it, with intent, in 2025. I first encountered it systematically for the first time when I read Norvig and Russell’s *Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach*. Interestingly, this book introduced me to several previously-heard but deep concepts; for instance – rationality, thinking, language, human speech, and even how complex a natural environment can be when attempting to model thru algorithms. I am grateful to them for such a wondrous book. If anyone, for any purpose, wishes to build a foundation in AI (which is necessary to sustain in the modern world, especially for software developers), they need to look into it. 

So, how do I fundamentally understand AI? 

Artificial Intelligence, for me, is mirroring. It is mirroring human-like capabilities in machines. And there are numerous subsets to it – performing tasks with no-to-minimal human intervention (Automation), understanding human language (including slang and context-based chats), and making rational arguments. They all form this broad term of AI. As we know, we’re seeing another boom of research and investment into AI as it has already happened twice earlier too. This time, however, its impact and inculcation into regular lives seem huge. Clearly, intelligence is being reinvented by humanity in a new light. This all feels like a pivot now. Such a moment is unprecedented. And the implications are to such a great extent, that we cannot even imagine most of ‘em.


What do I think about this? Well, yes, one has to embrace this, no matter what one’s profession remains, AI is going to affect them. It is inevitable. Not only software engineers, as the popular belief remains, every occupation is fundamentally THREATENED. Recently, as of 31 March 2025, as OpenAI dropped another model, a trend followed people generating Ghibli-art which came as a shock and fury to Miyazaki (and to me as well). The debate remains if this is theft or an exploration of the new model’s creative aspects. 


Surely, this points towards the kinda future waiting for us. AI has threatened multiple professions from the IT sector to even the creative people. What awaits humanity? Would humanity be left chasing tech and artificiality? Would humanities, the very thing that keeps humanity alive – art, music, nature, sports disappear or at least, the artists would change? Bots will be the artist and so would drop music videos? Would the soccer teams be made of cyborgs/robots playing and making inhuman stunts? 


And what is humanity doing now? The youth is learning (maybe) in schools and colleges. They are blindly following the path of technology. They don’t even like studying it. They code, crave sleep, seek vacations, drown into loud music, and scroll reels endlessly. They see their mobile as a break, leave the nature. And most of the time, we think about the technological implications of technology. What about the social implications? What about human behavior and intelligence?


We’re losing. We’re gradually dropping what our ancestors ‘ve accumulated thru centurial labor. Reading books is a chore now. Poetry is obsolete. Art is just a decoration. God is dead. Impression is the currency of the modern world. Love is disappearing, only obsession remains.
Humorously, such a devastated, darkened, pseudo-rational humanity is going to invent intelligence. Who would bear the weight of showing humanity the right path? Who would bear the weight of aligning AI towards truth? No one, but philosophers. Thinkers. Leaders. Ironically, nobody thinks today.


However, such a pessimistic tone doesn’t suit my ideals. Change has always been the very essence of human life and its time on Earth as a whole. We’ve to embrace the reality and the future awaiting us. We’ve to mend our ways. Our education system. We’ve to put bounds on the expansion of artificiality so that originality can persist. We can ensure a whole argument on this. However, let us save for it some other day.


Alan Turing played a major role in anchoring my interest in AI. If you’ve not heard of the Turing test then – it was a test proposed by Turing in his 1950 paper which consisted of an examiner trying to differentiate between responses from machine and human. If he couldn’t, the machine would be successful in becoming an AI. Simple it sounds. And so is his Turing machine [a theoretical machine] that boldly proclaimed that if it is not able to solve a problem, the problem is surely intractable, otherwise, no matter how expensive it ends up, it is solvable. The simple nature and logic of his concepts yet bearing such tremendous certainty inspires me. Moreover, his work during WWII in breaking the German Enigma’s ciphers evoked a bit of my interest in Cryptanalysis. An extensive discussion on this would belong to the Technology section (not here).
What further interests me is the way AI has developed historically. Symbolic AI (trying to create rational agents thru symbolic logic) based on the principles of McCarthy, then McCollough-Pitts’ Artificial Neuron, followed by Perceptron, and eventually, after the AI Winters, the advent of Machine learning as big data and the internet flourished. This all feels so natural, a hit-and-trial kinda progression. But the fundamental question remains essentially the same – Is the AI that we’re heading to the same as the AI these giants ideated of? Or are the implications of our current progression way off the track? Or maybe they’re unaware of the existential threat AI can inflict on humans?


In any way, this all sums up a noble cause for thinkers to ponder upon. The progression of us from this pivot (or maybe the pivot we’ve passed), lies on the shoulders of them.
