Somewhere, a few months ago, I read a quote that roughly said – “We ought to be proud of our face; it’s a mosaic of faces of all our ancestors”. I believe you might’ve gotten the idea. A person, especially in today’s fairly progressive age, cannot claim to be completely original or, to say, that whatever he’s realized, gained, mustered – all came from nowhere except from his own deeds. No, it's not true. 


As a child grows, he gains inspiration, ideas, and knowledge from his surroundings. Moreover, it's not only about intellectual ideas or merely inspirations, it is also about love, art, culture, behavior, and virtues. As the child encounters people and their ideas, he absorbs some traits of them unto him. A grown-up is the sum total of pieces of different people he has hitherto absorbed. Therefore, a human is not wholly original.


And this argument is extensible to societies too, or perhaps, to the whole of humankind. Billions of people have come before us, they’ve lived on the same planet as us, they’ve breathed the same air as us, and drunk the same water as us. They’ve wondered too, they’ve questioned too, they’ve loved too, and they’ve created too. Whatever we, as humankind, have created, on whatever luxuries we’re living upon, no matter how great are our merits or how keen-minded we are, no matter how efficient our daily lives are or perhaps, we take pride in being progressive or liberal; All our fortune, intellectual, artistic, social, cultural is an inheritance with minor tweaks. They – the giants, who have lived before us – since  antiquity or even earlier have blessed us with gifts.


Had Thales not tried to understand nature through logic rather than myths, had Newton not bothered to think about a falling apple, had Aryabhata not thought of something to represent emptiness (lets come a bit later), had Turing who not wondered about computational limits of computers, we would have not reached here. Perhaps, we might’ve gone extinct. Humanity’s knowledge is a treasure, accumulated by all those who have inherited it. Naturally, it’s on our shoulders to further cultivate wealth and pour into this chest of treasure. Yet, as we do so, we must do it with humility and gratitude for those who’re bearing us on their shoulders, our predecessors, those who’ve shaped us, us the humanity.

Bow to ‘em.