*Once a worm who ate apples every day, set to a search to know how sweetness tastes like.*
That’s how philosophy has happened to me.


WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY? For me, thinking for the sake of thinking. It all lies somewhere between existentialist awakening (an inquiry of the world, self, and surroundings) and absurdist acceptance (there is a limit on what we can know and we should remain content with the ambiguity for it only makes life worth living). The field is novel to me but still, it feels as if I’m home. And perhaps, there is no greater pursuit a human can embark on but philosophy. For me, there are several components that drive such pursuit, not only curiosity (as most would say); it’s a key component but not the only thing. A love. Yes, love drives philosophy. Love for ourselves. Love for mankind. Love for knowledge. Love is a key driver of philosophy. Perhaps curiosity is also kinda love.


But what can we expect from great philosophers? Ideas. Going against the ideas. Light. They shall be the ones to guide humanity out of any vicious storm it is caught in. Every generation, decade, or even year brings misfortunes for humanity. Philosophers are sailors. They bear the weight to steer the ship of humanity out of such vicious storms. They bear the keen eye and great stature to see what lies ahead. They are the watchtowers.


What about today? The 2020s mark the advent of Artificial Intelligence. There was a time, when we as humans looked even at the waterfalls with awe and wonder, we spoke gibberish, sticks were our numbers and now, it is time for humanity is creating intelligence in a new light. Such a time has never occurred ever in history. Computer Science bears the artifacts to lead this revolution. Mathematics bears the tools. Neuroscience bears the reference. Not one but philosophy bears the keen eye, the scope to see what lies ahead. No one but philosophy bears the sight to evaluate the implications as humanity witnesses the birth of itself but in a new light. Therefore, there is an urgent need for philosophers. Even if all the frontrunners of the AI revolution turn a blind eye to this dire need, philosophers would themselves realize this, they’d trace their way to their duty. A new order of them would rise, to lead again. And the world would need to do two things – to slow down, hear them, and deliberate.